# Credit-Card-Application-Fraud-Detection
Application fraud is a key concern in the phone applications and credit card industry where applicants apply for a product under a false identity which were either stolen or manipulated, resulting in identity fraud. In the credit card industry alone, it significantly impacts businesses affecting at least 5-10 million customers yearly in the US causing at least $10 billion fraud losses.
This analysis describes in detail the processes used to evaluate application data to capture fraud using supervised learning techniques. The raw dataset consists of 1 million rows and 10 columns. The process involved exploring and visualizing each variable in the dataset followed by cleaning the raw data to handle missing and frivolous entries. Further, I created additional variables by extracting features from the raw data resulting in a total of 1016 candidate variables. I followed this by performing feature selection using KS (Kolmogorov-Smirnov) score, first by selecting top 100 features across different groups of variables, and then narrowing down to 30 variables to feed into the models. I used random forest algorithm for wrapping to arrive at the top 30 features.
I considered logistic regression as the baseline model. I followed this up with other modeling techniques including decision trees, random forest, gradient boosting, and neural networks. Our dataset ranged from January to December 2016. I set the last two months of data (November and December 2016) for validation which made up 16.65% of the total data. The remaining 83.85% of data was divided into train and test datasets in 70:30 ratio.
Overall, I arrived at 2 models which had the highest fraud detection rate (FDR) of ~53.76% at 3% FDR. The neural network model (with 5 features, 2 layers each having 50 nodes) had a slightly better performance (0.04% more FDR) in comparison to the light gradient boosting (LGB) model (with 5 features, 31 max leaves). I decided to choose the LGB model as it is a more interpretable, less complex, and faster modeling technique.
